# Module 1 - Lesson 5
## Intro to Interactivity

### Learning Objectives:
* Add event handler(s) to change text color on click

### Introduction/Warm Up

Welcome to your first lesson on JavaScript! As you may remember from earlier, HTML is like the beams of our house, CSS is the walls and paint, and JS (JavaScript) is the functionality - it's what allows the doors and windows to open and shut, etc. With that in mind, let's make something happen on our webpage!

In your HTML file, make sure that your website title (the `h1` tag) has an Id of "title". Then, in your `script.js` file, add the following:

~~~js
let title = document.querySelector("#title");

title.addEventListener("click", function(){
    title.style.color = "red";
});
~~~

Now, when you click on your title text, it should change color to red! To change the color back, for now you'll have to refresh your page.

### Lesson

In our warmup, we made the color of our title text change. Let's break down what we did to make that happen.

1. We added a specific Id to the HTML element that we wanted to add functionality to
2. We selected the element in our Javascript using `querySelector`
3. We added an event listener to respond to a click event
4. We told the event listener what to do when a click happened - in this case, turn the color of the text red

These general steps are useful to remember as we add event listeners to our code. Event listeners aren't the only way to make things functional and responsive, but they're a good first step so this is where we're starting. Let's dive in a little farther into what each step looks like.

1. Add a specific Id to the HTML element that we want to make functional

We covered how to do this in the last lesson. It is important to note that you can also use a class or even a tag type such as `<p>` or `<h1>`, but `querySelector` will only grab one element, and it will always grab the first matching element in your page, so if you grab the first `<p>` tag and then add another one before it, your styling will move to the new first paragraph. For now, let's stick with using Ids.

2. In your JavaScript, select the element you want using `querySelector`

What this looks like:

~~~js
let title = document.querySelector("#title");
~~~

To break it down: 

* `let` - This is called a 'keyword', and it tells JavaScript that we are creating a piece of information to use later. These are called "variables", but don't get scared by the name.
* `title` - This is the variable name. This can be almost anything. In JavaScript, the convention (the accepted but unenforced normal) is to use camel case (thisIsCamelCase) to name your variables if they are more than one word long. You generally want your variables to be named something descriptive, so that you don't forget what they are. In this case, we used "title" because we are working with the title of the website. We also could have used "websiteTitle", "titleText", or anything else that makes sense to us.
* `=` - This is NOT equals in programming!!! This is "is assigned the value of". When you see a single equal sign, it's assignment. What we are doing is taking the stuff on the right side and putting it into what's on the left side.
* `document.querySelector()` - This is called a function, and it does something. Specifically, anytime you see a word or phrase that ends wiht parenthesis in programming, with or without stuff inside the parenthesis, it's running some other code in the background. In this case, it's reaching into your HTML code and selecting the first instance of (the first time it sees) whatever is inside.
* `"#title"` - This is how your `querySelector` knows what to grab. This can be any valid CSS selector. We have a `#` sign because we are selecting an Id.
* `;` - The semicolon ends a line of JS code. There are a few exceptions, but it's best practice to put these at the end of every line.

That's a lot of explanation for such a short line of code! So here's the TL;DR:

The left side, `let title`, makes a box with a label of 'title' that we can put stuff in. 

The right side, `document.querySelector("#title");`, grabs the HTML element from your file that has the CSS selector "#title"

The middle piece, `=`, tells the program to take the right side and put what it gets into the box created by the left side.

So now, we have a box labeled "title" that is holding the title `h1` from our HTML, and we can work with it.

3. Add an Event Listener to the title to respond to a click event

What it looks like: 

~~~js
title.addEventListener("click", function(){
    //code here
});
~~~

Let's break it down:

First, the line of code that start with `//` is a *comment*. A comment is code that the computer ignores. It's helpful for making notes to ourselves.

Now, what's happening here? Well, we take the box labelled "title" (the variable), and we add an Event Listener using `addEventListener`. What is an event listener? It's some background code (a function - notice the parenthesis after the words, just like with `querySelector`!) that lets JavaScript listen in the background for something to happen. In this case, we told it to listen for a `click`, and we're listening to the `title` variable - so whatever's in the `title` variable, when it gets clicked, this code will react to that click. 

What will the reaction be? Well, the event listener listens for a "click", and then performs the `function(){}` that you see next. Currently, there's only a comment inside the function, but we'll add some code in a minute. The last line is making sure that all of our parenthesis and brackets are closed up, and we always finish with a semicolon.

4. Tell the even listener what to do

What it looks like:

~~~js
title.addEventListener("click", function(){
    title.style.color = "red";
});
~~~

Notice how we have now added a line of code to our function. We can actually add as many lines of code inside of our function as we want, but for now we'll stick with one. We are once again selecting the title element, and the `.style` tells the JavaScript that we want to change the CSS for that element, and then we tell it what part of the CSS we want to change with the `.color`. This is a really great way of testing your code, but be aware that the exact names used in the CSS will be different than in the JS (for example `text-align` in CSS becomes `textAlign`). You also need to make sure that you put your color selection in quotes (""), and use an equal (assignment) operator instead of a colon.

One other note on this piece of code: just as with CSS, you can use hex color values for your colors, so something like `title.style.color = "#00afc2";` would not only be valid, but it would also give you a nice light blue/teal color.

#### Assessment

Each lesson will be followed by a short assessment to help you know whether you have mastered the material. This is completely optional, but we encourage you to take the assessment as many times as necessary to get all questions correct - and understand where the answers are coming from.

MC - multiple choice
MA - multiple answer
SA - short answer


1. (SA) Write code to log your morning routine. Include at least 5 steps, each step on a different line, with a comment for each line.
* a. Submit answer here

2. (MC) What would the following line of code do?
~~~js
let title = document.querySelector("#title")
title.style.color="#ffffff"
~~~
* a. Change the color of the website title to white
* b. Change the color of the website title to black
* c. Change the color of every paragraphs on the website to white
* d. Change the color of every paragraphs on the website to black

3. (MC) What type is the `title` variable from the example above?
* a. variable
* b. string
* c. number
* d. boolean
* e. constant

4. (SA) Search for “w3schools queryselector” and navigate to the w3schools.com link. Read as much or as little of this page as you would like. This is called “documentation”, or in other words is the official page describing the usage and details of a specific command in a programming language. Use the documentation page to fill in the following (just the types):
* a. Parameters:
* b. Return value(s):

##### Project Acceptance Criteria:
Continue your project from lesson 3 by adding the following elements to your web page:

* Add an event listener to your web page that changes the color of your website title when it gets clicked

##### Sample Project:

Enhance your tribute/profile web page by changing the title color when it gets clicked.
