# Module 1 - Lesson 1
## Why software development, and why JavaScript?

### Learning Objectives:
* Understand what software development is
* Explain the main uses of JS


### Introduction/Warm Up

In this portion of the lesson, we will typically give you a small warm-up problem to work through, often a simple example that utilizes the concept that we will be exploring in the lesson. For example, in a lesson on functions we might give you the definition of a function that we want you to create, and the steps to walk through in order to complete the problem, all without very much explanation as to what a function is or why you should care. Then, the rest of the lesson will go into detail about the concept, helping you to understand it in detail.

Since this is the first lesson, most of the information is introductory in nature, and there's no concept to practice. Therefore, for this intro, we mostly want to let you know that if you feel comfortable with the following topics, you should feel free to skip to lesson 1.5.
* IDEs
* Git (specifically GitHub)
* HTML
* CSS


### Lesson

So, what is software Development (SD)? In short, it's writing code. For a slightly longer explanation, software developers most often receive an idea or assignment, and have to break it down into component pieces, code up each piece, then put the pieces back together into a bigger project. You should know how to do a little bit of everything, and this course will get you there. Getting a job in SD will require more than just knowing how to codein JavaScript (JS), but this is a really great start, especially if you have a project at the end that you're excited about to show to prospective employers.

#### Course setup

This course is set up in 4 modules, with each module having a variable number of lessons that are more often designed to take about an hour. Each lesson will have a short assessment (usually about 3-5 minutes) at the end, and most will include a project piece. There will be examples throughout, and we aim to make the instructions as accessible as possible for everyone.

The "Acceptance Criteria" portion of each lesson is where you will work on your project. We encourage everyone taking this course to come up with an idea for a website to work on for yourself. If you can't come up with an idea, we do provide some ideas, but having something that you're making for yourself will have the following benefits:
* You will be more excited about your project
* You will be more motivated to work towards course completion
* You will be prouder of what you have completed

#### Importance of projects in learning and job hunting

In general, we have found that people who use self-directed learning (learning how to code from this or other online resources, instead of learning from a school) are best able to get jobs when they have a portfolio of projects that they can show to prospective employers. These projects don't have to be perfect, but if you can explain what you did, why you did it, and how you did it, all while you're excited about the project, that helps a lot. We've also found that keeping your code on GitHub helps to increase visibility and helps you gain confidence as well. 

#### Why learn programming

As you probably know (or you wouldn't be here), programming, or the art of writing code, is everywhere in the modern world. It permeates art, food service, and everyday life through phones and the internet. Without code, life would look very different. Related to this, people are hiring programmers, or software developers, at staggering rates. According to the [US Bureau of Labor Statistics](https://www.bls.gov/ooh/Computer-and-Information-Technology/Software-developers.htm), software development has 25% expected job growth from 2021-2031, and a $107k median salary. Getting your first job as a software developer can be difficult, especially when starting in a non-traditional way, so we're doing what we can to help you make the transition as smoothly as possible.

#### Targeted demographics/what prior knowledge do I need?

Starting this course, we assume that you know nothing about how code works, or how to program. We do expect you to know your way around a computer, including how to navigate your file system (that's a fancy way of saying that we expect you to know how to find a file you've saved somewhere).

We will instruct you to install a few programs and make some accounts on various websites, but everything is free and explanations for both how to do these things and why we're doing them will be given throughout.

#### Course outcomes/goals

By the end of the course, you will have a thorough working knowledge of JavaScript, as well as an understanding of how to search for, read, and understand documentation - explanation about how code works. If you've ever searched for something like "how to code", you will know that there are so many resources that knowing where to start is half the battle. We simplify that for you, and help you gain the skills necessary to know where to look. You will also have a portfolio that will contain one big project or a few smaller ones, each of which you will have created from scratch and be able to demonstrate to prospective employers. After finishing this course, you will be in an excellent position to learn a second programming language, or go more deeply into learning JavaScript frameworks like React, and building more projects.

It is important to note that programming is essentially solving puzzles all day, every day. When you learn a programming language, you are learning methods and tools for breaking down a problem and building up a solution. For some people, this will come naturally, and for others it takes more work, but anyone can code. Be aware of what you love and hate about the process of learning; there are enough areas of programming that JavaScript may not be for you while another programming language or framework will be.

#### What is javascript

So now, the nuts and bolts. JavaScript is a programming language. Much like English, Spanish, Chinese, French, and other spoken languages, programming languages are used to communicate ideas. Hoever, unlike the previous examples, programming languages are used to communicate ideas from humans to computers. 

When writing code, you may find that some parts of the process are intuitive and natural, while others take more practice to understand and master. This is not only fine, but also completely normal. It takes time and effort, and a lot of practice, to master any skill, and code is no different.

More specifically, JavaScript is a programming language that is primarily used for the web. HTML is a language that builds the bones of a website, much like the beams and walls of a house. CSS styles the website, like paint, trim, etc, and JavaScript actually makes the website work, like making sure that windows and doors can open and close. On a website, this looks like making sure that buttons clicking will actually make a change on a website, or that you can log in, etc.

All of these things happen on the "front end" or "client side" of a website. Some JavaScript also runs on the "server side" or "back end" - but what does that mean?

#### Server/client model introduction

You may have heard the terms "server" and "client" before. In order to understand what these are, we need to understand a little bit about how the internet works. When you access a website, you ask another computer somewhere else in the world for information. That computer then send the information over the internet to your device, and you see a website. In this example, your device (your phone, laptop, etc) is a *client*, and the computer you asked for information is the *server*.

A server serves information, and the client displays it. Most of the time, the server is simply storing information, and the client is responsible for displaying that information in a nice way. For instance, when you look at Facebook or Twitter, the server stores your login information and the posts, and the client holds the information for how those posts should be displayed in your feed.

Why do we care?

It's important to know what a server and a client are, because most of what you will be learning in this course will be general coding principles that you can apply anywhere, in any context, but we will only be actually coding front-end web pages. 

Client-only single-page websites have become more and more popular in recent years for a variety of reasons; by putting most of the processing into the client, server loads are reduced and in general more people are able to access the websites. In other courses, you may learn more about server-side code, but for now we're focusing on building single-page web apps.

#### Project-based learning

One last note on this course. At many companies, requirements for getting a job usually include experience, degrees, "or equivalent". This course will not give you years of experience in a job, nor will it confer a certification of any kind. To compensate for this, and because it will help you learn better and be motivated in your progress, this course is project-based. What this means is that we introduce a concept, and then give you "acceptance criteria" for a piece of a project that you should then complete before moving on to the next lesson.

The acceptance criteria are designed to be general enough that you can use them for any project that you have in mind, as long as you break it down far enough. Coming up with your own project idea that you are interested in will be the best way to ensure that you continue learning even when things get hard, because you will want to see your project through to completion. It will also make you more passionate about the solution when it comes time to tell potential employers, recruiters, etc about what you worked on.

On the other hand, if you aren't sure what you should create, we also provide proejct ideas to you along with general guidelines for how to accomplish the acceptance criteria for the sample project(s). These guidelines are purposefully vague to encourage you to think about how to solve the problem presented, and to make the solution aids helpful to those with their own proejcts.

At the end of the course, you should have one or more projects hosted in GitHub that you are proud of and can use as portfolio projects to show future employers that you know what you're talking about. There is also a "Resumes and Interviewing" portion of this website, which we recommend you check out when you are ready to start looking for a new job in code.

#### Assessment

Each lesson will be followed by a short assessment to help you know whether you have mastered the material. This is completely optional, but we encourage you to take the assessment as many times as necessary to get all questions correct - and understand where the answers are coming from.

MC - multiple choice
MA - multiple answer
SA - short answer


1. (MC) What is JavaScript?
* a. A programming language used primarily for server-side content
* b. A programming language used primarily for client-side content

2. (MA) What can you expect to get out of this course?
* a. A credential/certification
* b. (A) portfolio project(s) demonstrating JavaScript skills
* c. An understanding of programming fundamentals that will help me learn more programming languages if desired

3. (SA) Google “w3schools server client” and click on the first link. What are the labels on the first image, in order from left to right? (note: this question, and others like it throughout the course, are what we call “web quests”, and are designed to help you progressively learn how to search and navigate documentation, blog posts, articles, and tutorials about programming so that you can learn how to learn in the future)
* a. Client, server
* b. Server, clients
* c. Server, internet, clients
* d. Clients, internet, server
* e. Internet, server

##### Project Acceptance Criteria:
* N/A (There is no project for this lesson)

