# Module 1 - Lesson 2
## How to set up your computer for JavaScript development

### Learning Objectives:
* Install appropriate tools to prepare for programming

### Introduction/Warm Up

What tools do we need to code? At its simplest, all we need is a text editor (like notepad on Windows) and a web browser to run/display our code. However, there are a lot of tools that can and will make our lives easier, so we're going to walk you through which tools we need and why, and how to install them.

For your warm up today, we'll work on getting a web browser. Obviously you have one, or you wouldn't be able to access this course, so congratulations! Now, just to double check soem things - this course will give instructions for Chrome and Firefox where browser-specific details happen. Any modern web browser (read: don't use Internet Explorer) will support what we're doing, but you may have to google certain commands specific to your web browser if you choose to use something other than Firefox or Chrome (such as Edge, Safari, Opera, etc).

You should also make sure that whatever browser you use, you keep it as up-to-date as possible.

### Lesson

Ok, so what tools do we need besides a web browser? You already have your browser installed and updated, and obviously have an internet connection. Now we need a GitHub account and an IDE. More below.

#### GitHub

GitHub is a cloud file storage platform for code. It acts a lot like Google Drive in that you store your files on the website, and can access them later from a different computer. However, where Google Drive is optimized for things like documents and spreadsheets, github is optimized for code of all types. Not only does it store your code for you, but it can also help to display your projects in helpful ways so that you can show them to others and even collaborate in the future. It gives you edit histories, so that if you make a mistake you can go back and revert to an earlier version, and it can even deploy some of your projects for you, so that you don't have to worry about how to get your code from your computer to the internet. 

There is a concept in software development called CI/CD (continuous integration and depolyment), and GitHub can help with this. It isn't the only tool, but it can help.

For now, we want you to create a GitHub account. This is as simple as going to [github.com](https://github.com/) and following the instructions for settign up your account. If you already have an account, you may move onto the next step.

#### Your first repository

The next thing you need to do is create a "repository" for your first project. A repository is simply a folder where all of your project files will go. There are a few nuances that we are glossing over, but simply put you can have different folders, or repositories, wihtin your GitHub account, and each of them will be for a different project.

To create a new repository, from github.com, on the left side of the screen there should be a green button that says "Create repository" or "New". Click on that button, choose a repository name, click "Add a README file", choose the GNU or MIT license, and click "Create repository".

Your repository name should be something related to the project you will be putting into it. For those of you using our sample project, this could be "profile-page", "trivia-site", or anything else related to a profile webpage that also includes a few tabs for things like a trivia game. Note that spaces are allowed, but they will be replaced with dashes (-) anyway, so I recommend just putting the dashes in yourself, or using camel or snake case (thisIsCamelCase and this_is_snake_case).

#### Your IDE

An IDE is an "Integrated Development Environment". In a nutshell, it's a text editor that gives you some handy estra tools to make your coding life easier.

There are two main routes to go with your IDE in this course. The first is fully-online, with no tools installed. This will help you learn to code, and is much faster to set up initially - but you won't gain the practice or expertise with using the command line or running things locally on your machine. You will create an account on [CodePen](https://codepen.io/) or [Glitch](https://glitch.com/), and do all of your code writing and testing there. Then, you will download your files and manually upload them to GitHub, or you will use GitHub's online editor to manually input your files. There may be some editing required to get the files to work the same way that they would locally. Because of the difficulty that Windows presents with a lot of things related to development, this is the path we recommend for Windows users. There are workarounds and ways to develop on Windows, but it isn't very intuitive at this time.

The second option, which takes a little more upfront setup but ultimately works better for gaining experience doing what you will do day-to-day as a software engineer, is to download and set up your tools locally. This will require that you download and setup [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/Download) (or another IDE; there are lots of options, but VSCode is a solid option and it works on every operating system, so it's the one we'll talk about). Note that VS Code is *not* the same as Visual Studio, which is very big and slow. You should be able to follow the setup instructions for your operating system to get VS Code installed.

Next, you need to set up your computer for code.

Go to your Documents folder in your file browser and create a new folder with the same name as your project repository. Open VS Code and click 'Open folder', then navigate to and open your project folder. Type “Ctrl+\`” (this is the same on Mac, don't do "Cmd + \`"). This will open your terminal. There are other ways to open your terminal, but this is the way that we will assume you are doing it from here on out. Your terminal should open at the location that VS Code is currently at; let's do a few exercises to understand what the terminal is doing.

#### Intro to the terminal (you can skip this is you are using the all-online version)

Ther terminal may be intimidating at first. White (or other colored) text on a black background makes a lot of people uncomfortable at first. But you should be able to do some simple tasks fairly quickly. The first task: Where are you? To find out, run 

~~~
pwd
~~~

To run a command, type the command into your terminal (there should be a path followed by '>'. Click next to it, and type there.), then hit 'Enter'.

This command is short for "print working directory", or "what folder am I in?". It should print out something like "/Users/Documents/your_repo_name". As long as your repository name is at the end, you're in the right place. If it's different, that's ok, we'll show you how to get around.

The next task is to change where you are. To do this, run

~~~
cd ..
~~~

This command is short for 'change directory'. The two periods mean 'go up one level'. If you use one period, it means 'this current folder', so you would 'change' to being in the same place you are now.

Now that you have changed directory up one level, run `pwd` again. If your first path was "/Users/Documents/your_repo_name", you should now see "/Users/Documents". 

So how do we get back? Let's first check the contents of this directory (folder). Run the following command

~~~
ls
~~~

This command is short for 'list', as in 'list the contents of this directory'. When you run this, you shoudl see the contents of the folder that you're in, including the "your_repo_name" folder. So, to get there, run

~~~
cd your_repo_name
~~~

Note that everywhere we use "your_repo_name", you should actually be using the name of the repo that you created on GitHub.

Congratulations, you have run your first terminal commands! And the fun thing about these commands is that you can double check everything you're doing in your normal file browser.

#### Intro to git

The next step is hooking up your local folder to GitHub so that you can use the cloud storage and git capabilities that this offers. To do this, follow these steps:
* 1. Go to your repository's main page
* 2. In the upper right corner, there is a green button that says "<> Code". Click on it.
* 3. The box that opens up will have the word "Clone" with some copy-able text in a box underneath. Copy that text.
* 4. In your terminal, type:
~~~
git clone <paste content here>
~~~
* 5. Hit enter to run the command
* 6. Now run 
~~~
git status
~~~
You should have some outputted text that says 

~~~
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.
~~~

Congratulations, you are now ready to start coding!

#### Assessment

Each lesson will be followed by a short assessment to help you know whether you have mastered the material. This is completely optional, but we encourage you to take the assessment as many times as necessary to get all questions correct - and understand where the answers are coming from.

MC - multiple choice
MA - multiple answer
SA - short answer


1. (MC) What does IDE stand for?
* a. Independent Developer Experience
* b. Integrated Development Environment
* c. Integrated Development Experience
* d. Independent Developer Environment 

2. (SA) In your own words, what is the purpose of an IDE?
* a. Sample answer: It’s where we write our code, and they often come with tools to help us code more effectively/efficiently.

3. (MC) Where will you be doing your development, primarily? (no wrong answer)
* a. In-browser
* b. Locally (VS Code)


4. (MA) What is GitHub?
* a. A cloud storage solution for code
* b. A platform for hosting personal code projects to show employers
* c. A platform for hosting my resume
* d. A CI/CD tool

##### Project Acceptance Criteria:
* Have all tools installed and ready to code!
Tools:
* GitHub account AND first repository created
* VS Code OR online code-writing account created
