# Module 1 - Lesson 8
##  For Loops

### Learning Objectives:
* Use a for loop with an array to update information on the web page


### Introduction/Warm Up

In this lesson, well be learning about how to work with for loops and arrays together. To that end, open your `script.js` file and run the following code:

~~~js
// Define an array of fruits
const fruits = ['apple', 'banana', 'orange', 'grape', 'mango'];

// Use a for loop to iterate over the fruits array
for (let i = 0; i < fruits.length; i++) {
  // Log each fruit to the console
  console.log(fruits[i]);
}
~~~

Remeber, any line that starts with `//` is a comment, and will be ignored by the code. Here, we have created an array of fruits (you can add any type of fruit you want to this array), and then we use a for loop to *iterate* over each element of the array, logging it to the console as we go. In your console window, you should see each item in the array printed out.

### Lesson

#### Buttons and User Prompts

Let's take a moment to learn about buttons. A button is an HTML element. To create one, we very simply add a `button` tag to our HTML code, like so:

~~~html
<button>Click me!</button>
~~~

This button is not quite ready to be used, however. If we add more than one button to our page, how can we differentiate beteween them? Of course, we need to add an ID to our button. Let's give it the Id `test-button`. Now we can add functinoality to the button to make our web page even more interactive. Specifically, we're going to use the `prompt()` function to tell the user some information.

Be aware the the `prompt` function is great for learning and testing, but it should generally be avoided wherever possible, especially in production code. Many browsers block `prompt` messages by default, especially repeated ones, and even if it's not blocked, no one likes being interrupted in the middle of their browsing experience - so make sure to only use it when testing/learning!

Let's go ahead and add an event listener to our button. When we click on it, use the prompt function to ask the user a question. Go ahead and try it yourself, and only reference the code below if you get stuck.

~~~js
///only use this code if you get stuck, or to check your work!
myBtn = document.querySelector('#test-button');

myBtn.addEventListener("click", function(){
    prompt("What is your name?");
});
~~~

Now, whenever your button is clicked, the user is prompted for input. However, where is that input being used? Where is it going? Right now, we're not using it at all. Let's change that. Change your code to store the user's answer in a variable called `userResponse`. Note that this variable is going to be `string` type, meaning it's going to be words. (`string` is one of those weird CS vocabulary things that can be confusing for new learners, but it just means text-based data.) We want to do something interesting with that response, like displaying it to the user. Let's add a `p` tag above our button that says "what's your name?". Then the button can say, "click here to respond". When clicked, the user will be prompted for their name, and we can change the text in the `p` tag to say, "your name is ___", filled in with the user's name. 

This may sound daunting, but we already have all of the tools we need.

Let's start with the HTML. Create a `p` tag and a `button`. Make sure to give both meaningful Ids.

Next, let's write some javascript. Below is an example, but we encourage you to try your best to create the necessary code first, and only refer to this as a backup or if you get stuck.

~~~js
myBtn = document.querySelector('#my-button');
myPar = document.querySelector('#my-par');

myBtn.addEventListener("click", function(){
    let response = prompt("What is your name?");
    myPar.innerHTML = "Your name is " + response;
});
~~~

Now, whenever the button is clicked, the paragraph text will be updated with our new text based on their response. Note that the `+` operator isn't being used for math right here, it's being used to *concatenate* two strings, or in other words to put the two pieces of text together into one. Concatenation is an important concept to master, and it's important to remember that you're not "adding" two strings together, so "subtracting" them won't work (or make sense!).

#### For Loops

We've already seen for loops in action, but now it's time to take a deep dive into what they are and how they work.

* explain for loops
* define array of questions with a/b/c/d answers
* 'answer' button to input response
    *  cast all responses to upper case for checking
*  compare response to answers array
*  keep track of score in p tag
*  display score at end of questions
* Button + event listener = prompt + for loop -> string manipulation + (answers) array -> update innerHTML for results

#### Assessment

Each lesson will be followed by a short assessment to help you know whether you have mastered the material. This is completely optional, but we encourage you to take the assessment as many times as necessary to get all questions correct - and understand where the answers are coming from.

MC - multiple choice
MA - multiple answer
SA - short answer


1. (MC) What does the following code output? (if there are errors, what are they and how would you fix them?)
~~~js
let text = [1,3,5,8,43];
for (int i = 0; i <  text.length; i++){
    console.log(myArray[i]);
}

~~~ 

2. Write a grocery list in an array

3. Use a for loop to output/console log your grocery list

##### Project Acceptance Criteria:
* Use for loop to ask questions for your trivia game when they click 'start'
display score when complete

##### Sample Project:

* Use for loop to ask questions for your trivia game when they click 'start'
* Display score when complete
