# Module 1 - Lesson 6
## Variables and QuerySelector

### Learning Objectives:
* Use querySelector to create variables
* Add event listeners to different variables
* Change different attributes of your website


### Introduction/Warm Up

In the previous lesson, we used the `querySelector` function with an event listener to make our website title change color when clicked. For this warm-up, choose another element of your web page, and (using a similar strategy to the last lesson), make the element change color or other formatting when it is clicked.

### Lesson

#### Use querySelector to choose elements by id or class

In the previous lesson, we used querySelector to select elements by their id. However, querySelector can also be used to select elements by their class. Let's compare querySelector with other similar methods such as getElementById and getElementsByClassName.

##### `getElementById`:

* This method selects an element based on its id attribute.
* It can only select one element, as an id should be unique within the document.
* The syntax for getElementById is: `document.getElementById("elementId")`.

##### `getElementsByClassName`:

* This method selects elements based on their class attribute.
* It can select multiple elements, as multiple elements can share the same class.
* The syntax for getElementsByClassName is: `document.getElementsByClassName("className")`.

##### `querySelector`:

* This method selects elements based on CSS selectors, including both id and class selectors.
* It can select any element(s) based on the provided selector.
* The syntax for querySelector is: `document.querySelector("selector")`.

By using querySelector, we have more flexibility in selecting elements based on different criteria. This allows us to create variables that represent specific elements on our webpage.

#### Using Variables and Event Listeners with querySelector

Now that we understand how to use querySelector to select elements, let's explore how we can create variables and add event listeners to them. This will allow us to make changes to different attributes of our website.

To create a variable, we'll use the same syntax as before:

~~~js
let variableName = document.querySelector("selector");
~~~

Replace variableName with the name you want to assign to your variable, and selector with the CSS selector that targets the element you want to select.

Once we have our variable, we can add an event listener to it using the addEventListener method. Here's an example:

~~~js
variableName.addEventListener("click", function(){
    // Code to be executed when the element is clicked
});
~~~

In this example, we're adding a click event listener to our variable. When the element represented by the variable is clicked, the code inside the function will be executed.

Now, let's say we want to change a specific attribute of our website when the element is clicked. We can use the variable and the style property to make changes. Here's an example:

~~~js
variableName.addEventListener("click", function(){
    variableName.style.color = "blue";
});
~~~

In this code, we're changing the color attribute of the selected element to blue when it is clicked. You can modify other attributes or add more code inside the function to make additional changes.

#### Assessment

Each lesson will be followed by a short assessment to help you know whether you have mastered the material. This is completely optional, but we encourage you to take the assessment as many times as necessary to get all questions correct - and understand where the answers are coming from.

MC - multiple choice
MA - multiple answer
SA - short answer


1. (SA) What variable is selecting all list items from the page?
* a. `let v1 = document.querySelector(“#title”)`
* b. `let v2 = document.querySelector(“.lists”)`
* c. `let v3 = document.querySelector(“.paragraphs”)`
* d. `let v4 = document.querySelector(“li”)`

2. What is the first example on the w3Schools event listener page?

3. Read about event bubbling and event capturing on the documentation page. What do we need to do differently/add to the end of our event listeners to use capturing propagation instead of bubbling propagation?

##### Project Acceptance Criteria:
* Add a variety of events to page

##### Sample Project:

Enhance your existing web page by changing font, color, etc., styling, and innerHTML when clicked.
