# Module 1 - Lesson 7
## Arrays

### Learning Objectives:
* Use querySelectorAll to change multiple objects at once
* Use an array to update information on your web page

### Introduction/Warm Up

In your website, you should have a list. It could look like this:

~~~html
<ul>
   <li>thing 1</li>
   <li>thing 2</li>
   <li>thing 3</li>
</ul>
~~~

For this warmup, create an event listener that will change *all* of the list item a different color when any of them are clicked. To do so, user `queryselectorall` to choose your list items.

~~~js
let list_items = document.querySelectorAll("li");

list_items.addEventListener("click", function(){
    list_items.style.color = "red";
});
~~~

Now any list item being clicked shoudl select all of them.

### Lesson

#### querySelectorAll with classes and tags

Just like querySelector, querySelectorAll allows us to select elements from the DOM (Document Object Model) based on CSS selectors. The difference is that querySelectorAll selects all elements that match the given selector, rather than just the first one. This is particularly useful when we want to make changes to multiple elements at once.

For example, let's say we have multiple elements with the same class:

~~~html
<p class="paragraph">First paragraph</p>
<p class="paragraph">Second paragraph</p>
<p class="paragraph">Third paragraph</p>
~~~

We can use querySelectorAll to select all the elements with the class "paragraph" and make changes to all of them simultaneously. Here's how we can do it:

~~~js
let paragraphs = document.querySelectorAll(".paragraph");

// Access individual elements using a loop
for (let i = 0; i < paragraphs.length; i++) {
    paragraphs[i].style.color = "blue";
}
~~~

In this code, we select all elements with the class "paragraph" using querySelectorAll and store them in the paragraphs variable. We then loop through each element using a for loop and change their color to blue.

#### Comparing to getElementByClassName

You might be wondering how querySelectorAll is different from getElementsByClassName. While both methods can be used to select elements by class, there are some differences to consider:

* querySelectorAll returns a NodeList, which is a live collection of elements. Any changes made to the selected elements will be reflected in the NodeList. In contrast, getElementsByClassName returns a static HTMLCollection, which does not reflect subsequent changes to the DOM.
* querySelectorAll allows you to use any CSS selector, such as tags, classes, or attribute selectors, while getElementsByClassName is limited to selecting elements by class only.

#### Arrays

Arrays are a fundamental data structure in JavaScript that allow us to store and manage collections of data. We can use arrays to store information and refer to it when setting elements on our web page.

Let's take an example of a hand of cards:

~~~js
let hand = ["Ace", "King", "Queen", "Jack", "10"];
~~~

In this example, we have an array called hand that stores the names of cards. Each card is represented as a string element in the array.

To access individual elements of an array, we use the index of the element. The index starts from 0, so the first element has an index of 0, the second element has an index of 1, and so on.

Here's an example of using an array to update information on our web page:

~~~html
<ul id="cardList">
    <li></li>
    <li></li>
    <li></li>
    <li></li>
    <li></li>
</ul>
~~~

~~~js
let cardList = document.querySelectorAll("#cardList li"); // note how we can nest selectors

for (let i = 0; i < cardList.length; i++) {
    cardList[i].textContent = hand[i];
}
~~~

In this code, we select all <li> elements inside the element with the ID "cardList" using querySelectorAll and store them in the cardList variable. Then, using a loop, we update the textContent of each <li> element with the corresponding card from the hand array.


#### Assessment

Each lesson will be followed by a short assessment to help you know whether you have mastered the material. This is completely optional, but we encourage you to take the assessment as many times as necessary to get all questions correct - and understand where the answers are coming from.

MC - multiple choice
MA - multiple answer
SA - short answer


1. (MC) Which of the following is an array?
* a. `let a = [1,2,3,4]`
* b. `let b = {1,2,3,4}`
* c. `let c = (1,2,3,4)`
* d. `let d = <1,2,3,4>`



2. (MC) How could we select all of the list items in a page?
* a. `let v1 = document.querySelectorAll(“#title”)`
* b. `let v2 = document.querySelectorAll(“.lists”)`
* c. `let v3 = document.querySelectorAll(“.paragraphs”)`
* d. `let v4 = document.querySelectorAll(“li”)`


##### Project Acceptance Criteria:

* Change every element of a class with one interaction

##### Sample Project:

Start creating a trivia game for your page. Questions should be stored in an array.

##### Conclusion

In this lesson, we learned how to use querySelectorAll to select multiple elements at once and make changes to them. We also explored the concept of arrays and how they can be used to store and update information on our web page. By mastering these techniques, you now have more powerful tools at your disposal to manipulate the DOM and create dynamic web experiences. Keep practicing and exploring different possibilities!
